Tentative package name: gower.cluster

Tentative package title: An Implementation of Gower Distance in Exploratory Cluster Analysis.

Content/Background: For mixed variable data, i.e. when variables of different types (categorical vs. continuous) are observed in a study, a rigorous representation of the dissimilarity between observations via distance measures is somewhat tedious. To accomodate this challenge of measuring the dissimilarities observed in mixed variable data, the Gower Distance was developed (1). The Gower Distance utilizes the collection of mixed variables to compute an overall distance by manipulating a weighted sum of the variable-wise distances dijk, where i, j are observed points and k denotes a particular variable. The weights used are manipulated to represent each dijk in its needed form; as a logical, categorical (character), or continuous (numeric) related distance (2). While these distance measures prove useful in contrasting mixed variable data points, a compelling extension of Gower Distance is to implement it in clustering analysis involving mixed variable data. More specifically, a helpful development would be to design an R package that computes pairwise Gower Distances between points, which are then incorporated in a tool for exploratory cluster analysis to analyze the possible clusterings of observations of mixed variable data.

Intended Functionality: Regarding the R package itself, the intended use is to first input mixed variable data in the form of a data frame or matrix, while also inputting both a variable type list with corresponding elements indicating the type of each variable (see sources for details on how gower.dist treats inputs) and the corresponding variable weights denoting variable significance (2, 3). Given these inputs, I will then incorporate a function to manipulate the main data object to follow the specifications of the user (adjust variable types, etc.) and run adversarial checks on the inputs. Then, I will implement the gower.dist function to produce a pairwise distance matrix (note that only one matrix object will be input to gower.dist, 2) corresponding to observations in the main dataset. The resulting distance matrix will then be (optionally) applied to several plotting functions (including dendrograms and at least one other exploratory tool—possibly Silhouette Score plots) which will provide an output to the user (hence, another input will be provided to determine desired outputs). Time permitting, I will implement additional output options to further enhance the capabilities of my package in providing informative exploratory cluster analysis tools for mixed variable datasets.
